Boris Johnson is at the podium two weeks
since I last addressed you from this
podium I'm pleased to report that we've
continued to make steady progress in our
collective effort to beat the corona
virus for three weeks now the number of
new cases identified through testing
each day has been below a thousand the
latest sage advice is that across the UK
the our rate remains between naught
point seven and nine point nine sage
also assess that the number of
infections is shrinking by between five
and one percent every day the latest ons
data shows prevalence and new infections
to be stable and low the number of
patients newly admitted to hospital with
corona virus each day and the number of
Korean virus patients in mechanical
ventilation beds have both fallen by
more than 90 percent from their peak in
early April and while we mourn every
death the average daily death rate
continues steadily to fall this progress
is testament to the phenomenal efforts
of our NHS and social care staff working
tirelessly on the front line and it has
only been possible thanks to the
character and fortitude with which you
the British people have made fundamental
changes to the way you all live and work
when we set out our plan to rebuild on
the 11th of May we said that our goal
was to return to life as close to normal
as possible for as many people as
possible as fast and as fairly as
possible in a way that is safe and that
continues to protect our NHS that goal
remains the same but the tools we use to
achieve it are changing at the start of
the pandemic we knew far less about the
nature and the spread of the virus and
we had to take blanket national measures
national lockdown was undoubtedly the
right thing to do and has saved many
thousands of lives now however we know
more about the virus we understand the
epidemiology better and our intelligence
on where it is spreading is vastly
improved that means we can
Trollied through targeted local action
instead in England this work is led by
NHS test and trace and within it the
joint biosecurity Centre my deep thanks
go to Dido Harding who oversees this
working and who joins me today
this approach is already working in
weston-super-mare and Kirklees we took
swift and successful action to contain
outbreaks at specific premises in
Bradford and Blackburn with Darwen we
identified troubling trends in the data
and worked closely with respective local
authorities to increase testing and take
targeted action that work continues and
in Leicester we instituted a local
lockdown in order to bear down on
stubborn rates of infection as the
health secretary announced last night we
will begin to relax the restrictions
there next week we can do so because the
data is improving with the percentage of
people testing positive falling from a
weekly rate of 12.2% on the 29th of June
to 4.8% yesterday the approach varies in
different parts of the UK but all parts
of the UK benefit from the support of
our armed forces additional testing
facilities and billions of pounds of
support provided by this government
today we are publishing our framework
for containing and controlling future
outbreaks in England which will enable
national and local government to work
closely together from tomorrow
local authorities will have new powers
in their areas they will be able to
close specific premises shut public
outdoor spaces and cancel events these
powers will enable local authorities to
act more quickly in response to
outbreaks where speed is paramount
action by local councils will not always
be sufficient so next week we'll publish
draft regulations which clearly set out
how central government can intervene
more
actively at a local level where
justified by the evidence ministers will
be able to close whole sectors or types
of premises in an area introduce local
stay-at-home orders prevent people
entering or leaving defined areas reduce
the maximum size of gatherings beyond
national rules or restrict transport
systems serving local areas I know it
will be hard going for people affected
by these local measures
it isn't easy and for some it may seem
unjust that people just a short distance
away can live their lives closer to
normal but it has to be right that we
take local action in response to local
outbreaks there is no point in shutting
down a city in one part of the country
to contain an outbreak in another part
of the country now of course this local
approach relies on having an effective
testing regime in place and here we have
made substantial progress antigen test
capacity that's the test which tells you
if you currently have the virus has
increased one hundredfold since the
start of March from fewer than 2000
tests a day to more than 200 thousand
tests a day now publicly available data
suggests we are now carrying out our
tests more than anywhere else in Europe
in total and more tests and Germany
France Italy and Spain per capita we've
set up testing sites around the UK and
now have 200 mobile units which can be
rapidly deployed wherever they're needed
it's neither case and has been for some
time that anyone anywhere in the UK with
symptoms can get a test without delay
we're also testing increasing numbers of
people who don't have systems but who
are at higher risk
as we approach winter we will need to go
further not least as many more people
will show Co vid like symptoms as a
result of seasonal illnesses and
therefore require a test so we will
further increase testing capacity to at
least half a million antigen tests a day
at 3.5 million antigen tests a week by
the end of October demand for testing is
not the only challenge that winter will
bring it's possible that the virus will
be more virulent in the winter months
and it's certain that the NHS will face
the usual annual winter pressures we've
taken a number of steps therefore to get
the NHS ready for winter
we have massively increase the number of
ventilators available to patients across
the UK up from 9000 before the pandemic
to nearly 30,000 now we've substantially
increased the pipeline of personal
protective equipment for the NHS and
social care constituting over 30 billion
items of PPE over the course of the
pandemic we will be rolling out the
biggest-ever
flu vaccination programme in the history
of the UK we were also of course give
the NHS the resources it needs and today
I can confirm that we're providing an
additional three billion pounds of
funding to the NHS in England to get
ready for winter Scotland Wales and
Northern Ireland will also receive
additional funds this will allow the NHS
to continue to use the extra Hospital
capacity acquired from the independent
sector and also to maintain the
Nightingale hospitals until the end of
March this new funding comes on top of
the additional 30 billion pounds of
funding for Health and Social Care that
we've already announced this year so
we're making sure were ready for winter
and planning for the worst but even as
we plan for the
first I strongly believe we should also
hope for the best
that means looking ahead with optimism
now extending our plan to lift the
remaining national measures which have
restricted our lives since March so we
can get back to something closer to
normal life now I must stress the
timetable I am about to set out is
conditional it is contingent on in every
one of us staying alert and acting
responsibly it relies on our continued
success in controlling the virus and we
will not proceed if doing so risks a
second peak that would overwhelm the NHS
nonetheless it is important to give
people hope and to give business
confidence so in England from today we
are making clear that anybody may use
public transport while of course
encouraging people to consider
alternative means of transport where
they are available from the 25th of this
month July we've already committed to
reopening indoor gyms pools and other
sports facilities from the 1st of August
we will update our advice on going to
work instead of government telling
people to work from home we're going to
give employers more discretion and ask
them to make decisions about how their
staff can work safely
that could mean of course continuing to
work from home which is one way of
working safely and which has worked for
many employers and employees or it could
mean making workplaces safe by following
kovat secure guidelines whatever
employers decide they should consult
closely with their employees and only
ask people to return to their place of
work if it is safe as we reopen our
society
and economy it's right that we give
employers more discretion
while continue to ensure that employees
are kept safe also from the first of
August we will reopen most remaining
leisure settings namely bowling skating
rinks casinos and we will enable close
contact services beauty beauticians to
resume nightclubs soft play areas sadly
need to remain closed for now though
this will be kept under review we will
restart indoor performances to a live
audience subject to the success of
pilots and we will also pilot larger
gatherings in venues like sports stadia
with a view to a wider reopening in the
autumn
we will also allow wedding receptions
for up to 30 people all of these
measures for the 1st of August should be
done in a cove 'add secure way in
September schools nurseries and colleges
will be open for all children and young
people on a full-time basis as planned
and universities are also working to
reopen as fully as possible from October
we intend to bring back audiences in
stadia and to allow conferences and
other business events to recommence
again these changes must be done in a
coded secure way subject to the
successful outcome of pilots throughout
this period we will look to allow more
close contact between friends and family
where we can it is my strong and sincere
hope that we will be able to review the
outstanding restrictions and allow a
more significant return to normality
from November at the earliest possibly
in time for Christmas at all times we
will continue to work with the devolved
administration's in Scotland Wales and
Northern Ireland
to support and care for those at risk
wherever they live in the UK we've said
that the shielding program for those
most at risk in England the clinically
extremely vulnerable will be paused at
the end of this month we will stay
constantly vigilant and be sure to
restart shielding at any point if
required now I know some will say this
plan is too optimistic that the risks
are too great and that we won't overcome
the virus in time and of course if they
are right in saying that and we cannot
exclude that they are let me reassure
them and reassure you that we will not
hesitate at any stage to put on the
brakes from May the 11th onwards this
plan has been conditional and it remains
conditional but if we continue to pull
together as we have done so far I know
we can beat this virus hoping for the
best but planning for the worst and it's
in that spirit that we must carry on
waging this long hard fight against
coronavirus and I will now hand over to
Dido
Thank You Prime Minister firstly I want
to set out how far NHS testin trace has
come in just six weeks
in the last six weeks just under 2
million people have been tested for
coronavirus and over 34,000 have tested
positive we have contacted over 180,000
people who might otherwise have
unknowingly spread the virus further
over 30,000 people have given us their
feedback and 87% were satisfied or very
satisfied with the service and when you
get a test in person you can be
confident that you will get the test
result the very next day every week NHS
testing trace gets better and we're
working hard to keep improving none of
this would be possible without the
support of the British public who
come forward to get tested and responded
when we get in touch so I want to say
thank you this virus is challenging for
all of us wherever we live whatever we
do coronavirus hasn't gone but it is now
under control and the best way to keep
it like that is to work locally together
to stop the spread further
today's contain framework is all about
that it shows how we will work in
partnership with local authorities
public health England the wider NHS
local business and community partners
and you the public to take action at a
local level we already have countless
examples of this happening across the
country right now in Leicester hundreds
of local council and NHS staff have
visited people at home to offer them a
test there and then in Bradford over a
hundred community influences and faith
leaders have come together to ensure
that everyone has the information in
their own language in a way that works
for them and across the country
thousands of pubs cafes and restaurants
are now keeping records of customers so
that we can quickly respond if someone
gets sick each week over a hundred local
outbreaks are being successfully managed
by local authorities and public health
England teams and community partners and
this new framework will make it even
easier for them to do what's right for
their people with our backing and
support there is lots more for NHS test
and trace to do we will keep growing so
we can offer five hundred thousand tests
a day by the end of October we will
launch an app and backwards contact
tracing to find the source of outbreaks
and we will recruit more people to work
in local health protection teams making
sure that NHS test and trace is ready
for winter is the job for me and my team
to do over the summer but NHS trusts and
trace depends on all of us acting
responsibly if you get symptoms please
get a test and help us reach anyone you
will have been in contact with I'm sure
that this is how we can best protect our
families friends colleagues
local communities and all get back to do
what we love the best thank you thank
you very much Dido and thanks to
everything you're doing thank you to all
your team at NHS test and race this code
first to Jane from Mansfield Her
Majesty's Government are preparing for a
second wave in terms of securing PPE and
looking at capacity in the NHS other
things the general public should be
doing to also prepare well thanks very
much Jane yes I think the the most
important thing everybody should be
should be doing is thinking about the
the basic things we can do to protect
ourselves and to plate
everybody else so all the washing your
hands observing social distancing using
face coverings on public transport or or
in or in shops that the the basics to
stop the spread of the disease those
will be so powerful they have been so
powerful in getting the the disease down
in the way that we have it's been a huge
public act of coming together there has
really made this and made this possible
we now have some extra tools of course
at our a disposal the the the new powers
that I've just announced for for local
government for national government to do
local lockdowns
the vastly improved capacity we have now
have for testing the NHS tests and trace
operation there are also of course new
new drugs preparations therapies for for
the disease that we didn't have at the
outbreak but the single most powerful
thing we can we can all do is to
continue to follow that basic guidance
died literally anything you want to just
if you don't feel well if you have a
temperature a persistent cough you've
lost or changed your sense of taste or
smell get a test whoever you are
whatever you do however old or young if
you're in doubt get a test that's
probably the most important thing you
can do to help NHS test and trace
contain the virus and we can get the
resolve that test back within 24 us yes
you will get the result if you come to
one of our face to face testing centres
you'll get the result the next day
thanks very much Donna Thank You Jane
Victoria from tadka
Master has written you're urging people
to go back to work if they can however
our main childcare providers of
grandparents that means we must stay one
meter from within householders within
households do you plan to scrap the one
meter distance from within households
and allow them to provide childcare and
in turn more people will be able to
return to work well Victoria it's a very
very good question I think that the
answer there is that I think your your
grandparents would use your children's
grandparents would would count as part
of the the bubble that you're forming
with as it were within with two
households indoors so I think you'd be
okay Victoria I can tell you you'd be
okay to continue with those childcare
arrangements within within your
household I think what we're trying to
say about the one metre rule generally
in social distancing generally is that
clearly looking through till the spring
looking through to the long term impacts
that social distancing will continue to
have on many sectors of the UK economy
what we're saying is that we hope that
by November at the earliest if we can
continue to make progress in our
struggle against virus then it may may
conceivably be possible to move away
from the social distancing measures from
the one metre rule and other things
by that time now that is entirely
conditional as I say on our ability to
continue to keep the virus under control
but I think on your childcare Victoria
you are going to be you're going to be
all right
can we go to questions now from the from
the media Vicky young from the BBC some
companies have said to their workers
that they don't need to be back in the
office until January are you now saying
that employers should be doing more to
encourage workers back in August and if
so how does that fit with the advice
from the chief scientific adviser who
said yesterday he saw absolutely no
reason to change the advice that says
work from home if you can
and a second question if I may about the
health secretary who's ordered an urgent
review into the way that death
statistics have been compiled in England
do you have confidence in the work of
public health England well thanks very
much Vicky look on what was I'm totally
I totally agree with with with Sir
Patrick balance on what are you saying
obviously it's not for government to
decide how employers should run their
companies and whether they want their
workforces in the office or or not
that's that's very much for for
companies and what we're saying now is
that if employers think it'd be a better
and more productive for their employees
to come into the office and they can
work in a in a safe way in a kovat
secure way in the office then there
should be discussions between the
employers and employees and and they
shouldn't people should take a decision
and what we're saying is that we want to
encourage people to think it is safe to
come in to work provided employers have
done the way they kill done to make
their make their their premises covered
secure in the way that so many
businesses up and down the country have
already already done so that's what we
want to see from from the first of of
August discussions between employers and
employees about how they think people
can be most productive and if everybody
thinks that it can be done safely if
they people think that the place of work
is safe then of course people should I
should come in if that is what the
decision is but it's not the government
to make that decision if people a very
productive at home and I think there's
been you know huge amount of people have
discovered a lot of different ways of
working in the last few months and some
people have been extremely productive
from home and and and I think new
patterns of work have been emerging I
think many as you began your question
many companies are seeing opportunities
to do things differently but where
employers think it's now time to to get
people back and certainly they want to
be seeing people coming back into
the civil service here in here in London
where employees think it's time to come
back and it can be done in a safe way
than that is what we think they should
be they should be doing but it's it's
for them and their employers there are
employees to decide on the statistics
that I think Matt Hancock is going to be
doing a review of those of those
statistics and with public health
England
thank you very much Vicki
let's go to Beth Rigby of sky Thank You
Prime Minister on the one hand you've
just said that you think the virus could
become more virulent as we head into the
winter and yet you're also still easing
restrictions as well a Sir Patrick and
Chris witty not here with you today to
explain the public health and scientific
considerations behind these decisions
because they are two of the people to
quote you if you believe this plan is
too optimistic and the risks are too
great no Chris and Patrick I think
giving Evans to the Lord's and doing
lots of things today they in fact they
brief they brief the cabinet earlier on
today on these on these plans but I must
stress that the Chiefs scientific
advisors the chief medical officer give
us advice which we of course take very
very seriously
but in the end decisions are taken by
the elected politicians we have to weigh
the advice that we get and I don't think
that our wonderful scientific and
medical advisers would want to to take
those decisions for us those are
decisions for us to take and I think
people should understand the balance of
what we're saying what we're saying is
that where employers decide with their
employees that it's safe to come back to
work then people should come back to
work and provided that can be done in a
in a cave in secure way
thanks very much Beth we're gonna go to
Cole Dylan from ITV
Prime Minister yesterday as you know sir
Patrick valance said there was no reason
to change the advice of working from
home today you changed it has something
happened in the meantime that has meant
that you cannot change that advice and
as you say that it will not be left up
to employers to decide whether or not
their employees come if the government
doesn't have a view on whether or not
it's safe to work from home or work from
the office her employers supposed to
make that decision there's sort of the
gap the government has a certainly has
of you about whether it's safe and our
view is whether it is that it is safe
provided employers have taken the steps
that they need to take which of course
will be invigorated by the Health and
Safety Executive to make sure that their
place of work is coded secure if they've
taken those steps if the place of work
is carried secure than our view is that
it is safe but whether people should go
into work whether they they need to go
into work is not something that the
government can decide it is up to
employers to decide with their employees
whether they think the time has come for
them to be more productive in a place of
work for a greater portion of the of the
week than than staying at home as I say
Carl we've learned all sorts of lessons
over the last few months about the
wonders of zoom and muting and unmuting
our colleagues and all the rest of it
and it's fantastic and yet you know here
you are here we are communicating away
we know a little dreamed was possible
only a few years ago it's a miracle
but in the end human interaction face to
face conversations are important many
businesses tell me that it's what we're
saying is from the 1st of August if they
can talk to their employees if everybody
can discuss it in a serious and and
grown-up way if we can be confident that
the places of worker COBIT secure which
I'm sure we can which I'm sure we can
then employers working with their
employees should be encouraging people
to get back to work where that is right
for that employee that's what we're
saying and they should use public
transport if they if they need to though
of call
where or where possible alternative
means should also should also be used
okay thank you very much let's go to Jim
Picard of the FT how many boost you want
to go and when Harding the prime
minister said touch the tea body tests
we're going to be the changer pandemic
the government's all-in tests only 1
million done so far those bump with
coworkers and care enough and are you
planning to roll at our community or how
do you conclude that this is not a game
changer well I'll hand over to Dino on
the antibody testing in a minute but but
Jim thank you notice it says your
network bandwidth is low and I I
apologize for that because one of the
what about tasks as government is to is
to get gigabit connection for everybody
by 2025 and we will be rolling that out
Jim you know surprise the FT can't lash
out on some proper connections for you
by the way but anyway we will we really
do want to improve general people's
connectivity because I do think that
we've made huge progress and that
actually affects the the answer to the
question about you know how many of the
405 I think a question was about the
400,000 wonderful civil servants in
Whitehall should be coming back again it
will depend on the line managers it will
depend on who can you know where people
need to be that's a discussion to be had
between employers and employees about
how you can be most productive and
effective and I think there's a balance
and I we've learned huge lessons
throughout this crisis about the
potential of Technology but I think
there are also limits as we're also
seeing to technology and sometimes no
substitute for for face-to-face meetings
and an interaction so that's I think
what many many employers will be
starting to say from the first of August
and I won't dawn on antibody tests
rather similar to the Prime Minister's
answer on technology science also has
its limits so we've we've tested over a
million people for the antibody test in
Health and Social Care in only a few
weeks
continuing to roll that out to people
working in the NHS and Social Care but
at this stage the the science isn't
clear enough yet to tell us whether or
not the presence of antibodies and the
level of antibodies in your blood gives
you immunity and so at this stage the
actual only information that you get
from an antibody test is that you have
or haven't got antibodies and we're
learning all the time thanks to all of
those health and social care workers
participating in the studies and and
having those antibody tests done but at
this stage it's too early to be able to
say that it is or isn't a game-changer I
think we all want it to be everyone
wants to believe that we will find that
sort of silver bullet in the science
that means that we know that we're going
to be safe particularly for people
who've suffered and been very ill but at
this stage we don't know that yes and so
there are no plans immediately to extend
that antibody testing a lesser until the
science gives us that answer we're
searching for yes some perhaps I should
just add that what I am intended by that
is by the the game the game changer is I
think the well there are several things
that could be gamed a vaccine would
obviously be a big game changer but I
also think that tests and trace and our
ability to detect the outbreaks at a
local level in in real time as it were
and the closer we can get to you know
pretty much instantaneous detection of
outbreaks and you know we're making
progress the whole time the better we
will become at preventing a a more
general outbreak and and and containing
it faster and faster and so testing and
and tracking and tracing have got much
much better in the last
a couple of months it's been and I've no
doubt that by October November when
obviously that the there will be the
winter pressures that I've I've
described it really it will be even
stronger and even more resilient and
unuseful can we go to Jane Merrick of
the I please Thank You Prime Minister
and you mentioned November as a landmark
month for getting back to normal
and many people families across the
country will be thinking about Christmas
how optimistic are you that families
including grandparents will be able to
gather around the Christmas table and
spend Christmas together and secondly
last month sages by behavioral science
subcommittee published a report which
concluded that there has been a recent
decline in the credibility of and trust
in the government in relation to the
pandemic are you concerned about this
and how do you convince the public to
listen to what you're saying given that
conclusion well thanks very much jana
and what we want is for everybody and
you've got it completely about about
christmas because it's all it's not only
a very important time of year for for
families it's also a very important time
of year for the UK economy and and for
many many millions of people working in
all kinds of sector as many of them not
on and many of them on on modest incomes
and it's a very so it's very important
that we we hope for the best
j and that's what i'm trying to to set
out today a plan that we where we hope
for the best but plan for the worst and
and clearly the steps that were taking
the the september october november
they're all conditional on our continued
ability to defeat the virus and just in
your last point the way we we've
defeated the virus so far has been
through the massive common sense of the
british people and their ability to see
what needs to be done and to do it and
that is how we've reduced the number of
deaths the number of hospital admissions
and
got the virus to the stage it is at and
of course Jane if you look at other
countries around the world you know I
must say this in all candor to the
British people they look at all the
countries around the world we can see
all too clearly what could go wrong if
we if we if we don't continue to follow
the guidance if we don't continue to
keep this thing under control because
plainly this is a very contagious
illness and and and it is there are
parts of the world where it's continuing
to spike we don't want to see that in
this country we think we have a new
panoply of
of tools that will enable us to fight it
the local lockdowns the the measures
we're bringing in the contain framework
tests and trace new drugs new therapies
but in the end the real secret is in the
the common sense and the collective
action of the British people thanks Jane
let's go to Paris
good to Yanis of The Scotsman Thank You
Prime Minister
um Nicola Sturgeon net approval rating
on coronavirus is 99 percent higher than
yours the SNP is on course to win an
unprecedented majority in Scottish
Parliament elections next year and
independence support for independence
has never been higher do you accept that
you Prime Minister are the biggest
threat to the Union and if not why do
you think so many Scots want to leave
the UK well thanks very much post I
think actually when you look at what's
happened under this during this crisis
that has been very good in very close
collaboration between despite the the
surface differences in the and the
polemics that that you refer to they've
been very good discussions across the
the UK between public health authorities
between the scientific and medical
officers and actually the the agenda
that is being pursued by all the parts
of the UK beneath the service has been
very very similar and it's thanks to the
strength of the Union I would say that
actually there is a we've had the
response that we've been able to to
muster as a
as a one-hole United Kingdom whether
that's our armed services bringing tests
across a testing kids across the whole
of the country taking people in remote
parts of Scotland to the testing centers
where they needed to go to or the the
might of the the UK Treasury getting the
NHMRC
getting the further scheme up and
running across the whole of the of the
UK in a way that I thought was
incredibly impressive so I know I'm
conscious that people will want to try
to make divisions and it's quite right
that there should be distinctive
approaches in some aspects of the way we
approach coronavirus but I've absolutely
no doubt that the Union has proved its
worth during this crisis time and time
again the oldest most successful
political partnership in the world and
we certainly don't want to see it broken
up anyway
Paris thank you very much for your
contribution thank you to everybody
who's joined us today thank you
particular to Dido from NHS testing
trace thank you all for listening
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dog code at UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News